Before I begin,
I need to warn people that
this is a really dark topic,
and the things I've uncovered were
difficult for me to deal with,
so I can only reasonably expect
them to be difficult for you too.
It's also worth mentioning that,
unless I said otherwise,
I'm going to be using fictional
names and usernames.
Okay.
So...
For me, this whole thing
started just before Christmas.
As regular viewers know,
I run a few teams
who develop software
that helps people write music.
And in order to make sure that
our software is working as expected,
we're always on the
lookout for music people
who write using our tools.
So, recently,
a friend I work with
stumbled across a composer
I'm going to call
'Bobby C',
who'd been sharing music on YouTube
that he'd made using our software.
And as my friend looked
through Bobby C's work,
he discovered a
really unnerving upload
that had come out
just the day before,
titled:
"My final piece".
My friend also noticed
another upload
which came out at the same time.
It was a final goodbye
from Bobby C to all his subscribers.
He thanked them for
all the kind words
they said about his music,
thanked them for subscribing to him,
and then, very
matter-of-factly, announced
that he was ending his life.
And then that was it.
My friend was very alarmed by this.
These two videos
weren't yet 24 hours old
by the time he'd found them,
so he acted quickly,
trying to track down
Bobby C on social media
to find a way to get
a message to him.
He then sent me a message
to let me know what was happening.
So, after some searching, my friend
eventually tracked down
a post onto a different alias
on a forum that was dedicated
to the subject of s---cide.
This post was only a few hours old.
It was titled:
"I'm ready to do it..."
In the post,
the user identified
himself as Bobby C,
and then described the method
he was going to use to end his life.
In response to this post
were a few replies
bidding him farewell
and complimenting
him on his bravery.
Now, as you can imagine,
this got my friend
into quite a panic.
He began frantically searching
to find out more information.
Eventually,
we discovered what
country he was from,
and with a little bit more work,
discovered his real name too.
We passed this information
to local authorities,
but unfortunately it was too late.
We got confirmation that Bobby C,
who's actually a young teenager,
had ended his life in
an incredibly shocking way.
We were obviously really
distraught by this.
For us, it happened over
the matter of a few hours,
and we didn't know
how to process it.
Anyway, a little later
after we'd received
confirmation of his passing,
I went for a walk with
my kids to a local park,
and a thought began to nag me.
"Bobby C."
"You know what?"
"I think I know that name."
So when I got back home,
I searched for him on
various social media channels,
and immediately he popped up.
Turns out he followed me in
quite a few different places.
He'd commented on
a few of my posts,
and had been a reasonably active
member of my Discord server,
which is a place where
people largely discuss music.
He was interested in composing
more than anything else.
He'd helped other composers
with their pieces,
and showcased his music one time
on one of the listening sessions.
Like me, he was a fan of chess,
and he seemed to have a
pretty solid knowledge
of the standard openings.
He also took part in some of
the sillier activities too,
like
submitting fun images of
really janky-looking musical toys
he'd found in his local store.
He found it funny one time when
I referred to my kids as
"janklings"
because one night they
just wouldn't go to sleep.
Looking back over his messages,
he just seemed like a
really fun sweet kid.
And with more digging,
we got a better glimpse
into his life.
We found out more about his
hobbies and academic achievements.
We found out about his school,
as well as the wider
community he was active in.
Seeing the impact his death
had on that community was-
was just horrible.
The- There's no other word for it.
Now, there was another reason
I did so much digging
into his activity on my Discord,
which is that I wanted
to see whether
he'd ever hinted at his
intentions to anyone there.
Turns out,
no.
Nothing.
Not once did he say anything
even remotely pessimistic.
He encouraged other users
with their music
and
took part in all the
goofiness that goes on.
So, I felt, like, some relief
that we didn't miss anything.
He'd never said a word
about his problems to us.
But then I began to wonder,
"Why?"
Like, why did he tell
this other group instead?
And that's when I began
to take a closer look
at the forum I mentioned earlier,
the place where he posted
his final farewell.
Now, guidelines for media
reporting on this subject
strongly discourages
naming this site directly.
For this reason, I'm
gonna call the site
'Sorrow Solution',
or 'SS' for short.
KELLI: Well, I was put in touch
with someone from the AFSP,
which is the American Foundation
for S---cide Prevention.
Um...
This was early back in 2020,
and...
and I asked her,
"Did you get a chance
to look at this?"
And she said, "I-"
"I can't even look at it."
"It's so bad."
And- And so...
MARTIN (narrating): This is Kelli.
She got in contact
with me after reading
some objections I posted
on the SS forum.
Her son took his own life
after being coached
by this site in 2020.
Since then,
she's been campaigning in
the U.S. to have it shut down.
MARTIN: How have you
and your family coped,
given that you know
about this forum
and you know that this
forum was involved?
KELLI: I mean, it's
a nightmare.
It's a nightmare
and it's something that,
uh, you know, is...
my family doesn't want me to do,
because obviously
it's very unhealthy.
Um, it's...
You know, when you're
staring at a s---cide website
for 12 to 18 hours a day,
trying to get information,
you know, for The New York Times,
trying to put parts
of pieces together
and trying to figure out who's who,
what is what, what is
going on, who was involved,
you know?
And while you're trying to grieve
and- and wrap your head around,
you know, the loss of your...
child that you- you
will never see again.
It's... horrific.
It's- I mean, there
really are no words
to describe
what it's done.
MARTIN (narrating):
Kelli introduced me
to other parents
whose children have
also taken their lives
after exposure to SS,
and who are now also campaigning
in their own countries.
It was learning about
their difficulties
in raising awareness
about this site
and in getting it shut down
that convinced me
to become involved.
We'll speak to some
of these parents later,
as well as legislators
in the U.K. and the U.S..
The purpose of this
video is twofold.
First, I want to draw
people's attention
to the criminal nature
of this specific forum
to warn them of its dangers.
I guarantee you,
if you've not encountered
this place before,
you won't believe how
bad it actually is.
Now, my second reason
is to do something
I've not really seen in
any other media coverage.
Since SS gets millions
of page views a month,
(it had 10 million views
in September 2022)
it has a lot of users,
and I want to address them directly.
If you're a user of this site.
I believe there are
overwhelmingly strong reasons
why you should leave it.
I believe you are being used
to contribute to a significant
level of destruction.
Destruction you have
not been informed about.
So let's get started.
The SS forum exclusively deals with
matters relating to
ending one's life.
At first glance, it's a little
tricky to find your bearings
due to all the specialized
jargon and abbreviations.
For example,
the act of bringing one's life
to an end is referred to as
'CTB'.
which stands for either
'cease to breathe'
or, more popularly,
'catch the bus'.
So, while thrawling the site,
you'll immediately be
confronted with posts like:
"Preferred method of CTB?"
or:
"Please help!"
Wanna CTB by
[name of method]
by [sic] worried about SI".
'SI' stands for
'survival instinct', by the way.
And when diving into these posts,
the first thing you'll
observe is just
the absence of content moderation,
despite the site's main rule:
"Do not encourage,"
"suggest,"
"manipulate,"
"coerce,"
"or help users carry out"
"acts of any nature whatsoever,"
"including CTB."
"Only provide factual information and emotional support"
"to those who ask for it."
This rule is a complete smokescreen.
All you need to do is
click on almost any post
and you'll immediately find users
blatantly breaking it.
For example,
in a post titled:
"I need to CTB tomorrow",
the user says:
"Please help me with a way out."
"My preferred method
has a low success rate"
"and I can't think of anything else."
The first response to this
is advice so specific and so graphic
I couldn't possibly repeat it here.
This is a standard example of
daily conversation on this forum.
The people who run this
server also actively
discourage advice that
tells people to seek help.
For example, on one thread,
the poster announced that he
was about to take his own life.
One response to this was:
"If you change your mind,"
"call help ASAP"
However, the person who said this
was then chastised by
another user who replied:
"Why would you say THAT here?"
This last comment was then liked
by the site administrator,
by the way.
Their most important
policy relates to age.
The site states that you must
be 18 or over to sign up.
Their method of enforcing this?
A tickbox
that you have to check to
verify that you are actually 18.
No protections of any kind.
There are a few more examples
of policies like this,
some of which I'm going
to go through later,
but what's important
to note now is that
they're not enforced
in any meaningful way.
I later learned that
most of them were actually
added not too long ago
when the site began coming
under more scrutiny,
so it's a nice covering exercise.
Earlier iterations of the
site were much more blatant.
And this led me to wonder:
If you peel away the veneer,
what's the actual belief system
underpinning this site?
And that's when I began
to uncover a hole
so deep and so toxic,
it just beggars belief.
Let's start with the
site's real philosophy.
In a prominent sticky thread
at the top of the forum page,
there's a list of four philosophies
that the admins describe as being
"adjacent" to theirs.
This is key to understanding
their mindset.
There's...
(drumroll...)
nihilism,
which they reductively summarize as:
"A philosophy that views
all life as meaningless"
We'll just leave that one as is.
The second philosophy is
antinatalism,
which they describe as:
"A philosophy that assigns
negative value to existence..."
"(because existence) is imposed upon
the individual without their consent."
Now, in recent years,
this particular idea has gained
traction on various forums.
I don't want to get diverted
by the subculture too much.
Whatever its origins,
its main idea now amounts to a
serious resentment of
one's parents, because
they're the ones who
put you on this planet,
and they did that to
satisfy their own
selfish requirements
to have children.
Here's an example of how this idea
manifests in conversations
on the forum.
In one thread,
a user describes how
he's worried about
the pain he’d cause to his
mother if he took his own life.
To which another user replies:
"I'm always curious how
people who want to CTB"
"can still love their
mother so much."
"After all,"
"they used you as a meat
shield for their own good."
The third philosophy is
promortalism,
described as:
"A philosophy that assigns
a positive value to death"
Now, this one is so stupid,
it's tempting to skip over,
but it's actually really important.
It underpins an attitude that you
encounter on the forum constantly:
the idea that life is so horrible
it's amoral to act in
any way that might
dissuade someone from
ending their life.
In practice, it's used constantly
to chastise those who
recommend therapy,
or to suggest that there
might be a reason to live.
In fact, on this forum,
suggesting there's a reason to live
is about the most gauche
thing you could possibly say.
And last,
(and least)
libertarianism.
"The belief that the individual
is the owner of their own body"
"and has the right to dispose
of it however they see fit."
Um...
It wouldn't be my go-to
summary of libertarianism.
Uh, there's obviously some kind of
'personal freedom' connection
being made here,
for those who might already
be in that headspace,
I don't know.
Feels a bit tacked on.
Now, along with this is the
forum's attitude towards
all mental health
and recovery services.
In a nutshell, if you're
thinking of ending your life,
the predominant opinion on the forum
is that you should not speak
to anyone about your thoughts,
because if you do,
they're going to lock
you up in a psych ward.
This isn't directly
expressed in the site's
official link to recovery options,
where, at least, they provide
a few hotline numbers
as well as
zany pseudoscience alternatives like
microdosing LSD and
MDMA-assisted therapy.
No, if you want to get a sense
of what the admins approve of,
just look at their moderation.
What they permit
and what many of the
most prolific members say.
For example,
when one user posted:
"I learned long ago that there's"
"absolutely no point
in talking to people."
"Doctors, psychiatrists,"
"family, friends,"
"it doesn't matter,"
"they never listen..."
"they seem to prefer
taking others hostage"
"over respecting someone's
decision to CTB."
In response to this,
one of the most prolific members,
who's posted over 16,000
messages on this site,
responded:
"I agree with this."
"People will never be
able to understand"
"as they are not in
a similar situation"
"and if you open up
about your suffering"
"it's likely that you will just
get invalidated in some way."
I'll get back to this member,
who I'll refer to as 'cake123' later.
It really only takes
a few minutes of
viewing various posts
on their responses
for you to become exposed to this
anti-help perspective,
and only a few hours more
for it to become
crystallized in your mind.
I understood it perfectly
well before I discovered
their four ‘adjacent’ philosophies.
So, are all the members
of the site like this?
No.
There are some who strongly
disagree with this mindset.
Some who do call it toxic.
The moderator's response
to this criticism
is nearly always to emphasize that
free speech is of greater importance.
The 'free speech' argument is,
again, another smokescreen.
It allows the moderators
to promote and encourage
seriously dangerous conversations,
while quietly banning those
who protested too much.
"I need to CTB"
"but I don't have a method."
"[Method A] is just unavailable."
"I've tried so hard with it
but it's never worked out."
"[Method B], [Method C]
and [Method D]"
"are all unbelievably difficult
to get your hands on."
"Everything else is too
painful, slow or unreliable."
"This isn't fair."
"I truly hate it here."
"If you really want to
leave this world,"
"the method will find you."
"And you will not fail."
"Try [Method E]."
"All you need..."
And then this is followed
with instructions
and a video to give
more concrete specifics.
Free speech, indeed.
Free speech that
directly contradicts
the supposed core policy of not
suggesting, helping or encouraging.
This is what SS
actually is.
And this pretense of valuing
free speech above all else
is persuasive to many on the forum,
but what a lot of them don't realize
is that regardless of their views,
they're participating
in a percentage game.
As I mentioned,
the site gets millions
of page views a month.
And of those who sign up,
a significant portion
are clearly attracted
to the most extreme ideas.
That's the problem.
The fact that some members
have the freedom
to call these ideas toxic
without getting banned
doesn't make that problem any better.
The stakes are just too high.
When a minor is assisted in
ending their life on the forum,
that's not the unfortunate
price of free speech,
that's a catastrophic
moderation failure.
Now, the death of Bobby C
is a perfect example of this failure.
You see, months before he died,
he had been planning how he
was going to end his life
with the help of others on the site.
First, let me show you
how the scaremongering
and blatant misinformation
about seeking help
influenced his thinking:
"What are the consequences
of failing to CTB?"
"I don't have a therapist
or anything like that."
"I'm considered 'normal'
by most people."
"However, I absolutely"
"do not want to risk
hospitalisation if I fail."
"I'm scared to reach out to
any therapist or help service"
"in case they force
me into a hospital"
"because they'll completely
prevent my attempts to CTB."
Now, this is the
reddest of red flags,
because he's just admitted that
he's never sought help ever.
But the first response?
"Your biggest consequence
is going to be either"
"permanent damage"
"or hospitalisation."
"Both can be avoided with
enough research and planning."
There is at least
one message that advises caution:
"If there's a part of you
that wants to get help,"
"seek it."
"Don't make a permanent decision
if you're not entirely sure."
"There are people you can talk to"
"who won't automatically
hospitalise you..."
However, the person who said this
then felt it pertinent to
'balance' this statement
by describing how
terrible and uncaring
the mental health services
in their country are.
And that there was the sole instance
where someone suggested to Bobby C
that he might reconsider his plans.
It had been mentioned once,
and once was enough.
The rest of the comments
are all encouragement
along with a large dose of
anti-therapy and anti-help dogma.
Unfortunately, Bobby C
was much more convinced
by the suggestion that
he should plan properly,
so he did.
There's a whole other
thread where he,
assisted by a few others,
assessed the best approach
he should take
to carrying through
his chosen method.
Again, I'm not going to
detail the method he used.
The only thing I'll say
is that I found it
unbelievably shocking
due to how violent it was.
It has honestly stuck
with me ever since.
The reaction on the
forum was more like
admiration.
As one commenter put it:
"...you got BALLS to
choose this method."
For me,
the most upsetting thing
about this site
are the ‘Goodbye’ threads.
The first page I ever saw,
the one by Bobby C,
was a goodbye thread.
As you can imagine,
goodbye threads are posted by users
who are ready to carry
through their final plans.
They're avoided by many
people on the site
who find them too upsetting.
What's particularly
notable about them
is that you don't often
see anyone make an appeal
for the original poster
to reconsider,
(they're called 'goodbye'
threads for a reason)
because, in the logic
of this community,
the point of no return has been
well and truly passed.
And on every one of these threads,
every single one that I've read,
the same prolific toxic member
I mentioned earlier,
cake123,
will respond with the
variation on this line:
"Farewell."
"I hope that you find the
freedom from your suffering"
"that you wish for."
Now, it's not hard to see
how all of this could
be described as a cult.
There are three telltale signs:
First,
it has a highly peculiar
alternative ideology
which runs contrary to
mainstream thinking.
In particular,
that inversion of morality
I spoke about earlier
that you shouldn't stand in
the way of someone dying.
Second,
a ridiculous hostility to
mental health professionals
and the idea of treatment.
You see this a lot with Scientology.
Their ideology runs contrary to
mainstream mental health
treatment too,
so they viciously attack it.
It's Cult 101.
Your ideology will seem stronger
if you clobber all
competing ways of thinking.
Third,
and most telling for cults,
including Scientology,
cutting people off from
their support networks.
Medical professionals
and therapists?
Well, they only care about money,
and they're going to lock you up if
you tell them what you're thinking.
Your parents?
They're the ones who did this
to you in the first place
by selfishly dragging you
into this meaningless world.
You can't trust them.
And those preventing you
from harming yourself?
They're assaulting your freedom
to do what you want with your body.
And in order to lock you
in as much as possible,
it's always assumed that if
you register on the site,
you must have exhausted
all other options.
I mean,
why else would you be here?
It would be immoral at this stage
to stand in your way, right?
As one forum member put it:
"it should be assumed that"
"anyone posting a goodbye thread"
"or asking for advice on a method"
"has already considered their
'options' to get better..."
"we should give the individuals
the benefit of the doubt"
"in assuming that they
made the best choice"
"they believe they could have made."
And just in case all of
the above doesn't work,
members are reminded
on a daily basis:
"Life is terrible".
"Death is beautiful".
And if you think I'm
exaggerating in any way,
here's a post by cake123,
who the admins actively
protect and defend
when other people on the forum
complained about the toxic
nature of their posts:
"This is the truth."
"The fact is that a peaceful s---cide"
"would solve everything in life"
"and it would be the
best outcome possible"
"to pass away peacefully"
"and be permanently free
from this existence"
"without having the
ability to suffer"
"and struggle in any way."
"Death is really the only solution
when life itself is the problem..."
"The fact that life exists"
"is a cruel mistake"
"and it's wrong to value
life in any way..."
"and these false beliefs"
"prevent others from
achieving true peace"
"which can only be achieved"
"by leaving this world."
This person weighs in
on just about every
thread on the forum
to actively encourage
others to take their lives
as quickly as possible.
As I mentioned already,
this person has over 16,000 posts.
When one user asked for advice on
whether they should spend
a lot of time researching
how to end their life
in a painless way,
or just
"get it over with",
cake123's response was:
"I would personally just try and"
"go for the most
straightforward plan possible"
And that leads me to the next
inevitable question.
How do we know this person
isn't a psychopath?
Some middle-aged dude
who gets a kick out
of being involved
in as many young people's
deaths as possible?
How do we know this person
isn't a card-carrying murderer?
Because if there's one place
I think might be likely
to attract those kinds of people,
it's this place.
It's not hard to grab
an anime character,
say you're a young girl,
and then tell people things like:
"I agree with this."
"It'll be better if you die."
And with that in mind,
let me now introduce you to
a section on the site called:
'Partners',
a listing of people
all over the world
looking to meet up with
someone else in their country
so they can do the deed together.
People post the country they live in,
the method they'd like to use,
and anyone interested can
send them a private message
to work out the details.
Only just a few weeks ago,
a man named Craig McKinley
was given a prison sentence
in the high court in Glasgow
for using the 'Partner'
section on SS
to lure a woman over to his flat
under the pretense
of helping her to
practice a s---cide attempt.
He choked her until
she became unconscious,
and then sexually assaulted her.
And then he did it again
to a different woman.
The other day, I found a post
by a guy on the 'Partner'
section who said
he'd be willing to fly to you
if you live in a country where
a particular method
is easy to achieve.
Apparently, this would
require some preparation.
Quote:
"We could search for a forest"
"where we can test [this method] together"
Something tells me
only one person's coming
out of that forest.
Now, when considering
everything I've said so far,
one obvious question
that pops up is:
do the moderators do anything
to protect vulnerable users?
Let's dig into that for a moment.
First, the site states that
only those of "sound mind"
will be allowed to join the forum.
Now, the term 'sound mind'
is used to describe
a person's ability
to reasonably understand
their surroundings
and act rationally in
their own interest.
It's an important thing
to determine in
contentious legal situations,
like
when a person makes an
unusual change to their will
or when they refuse
medical treatment.
Did the person act in
sound mind at that moment,
or were their actions
negatively influenced
by something like
coercion,
bereavement,
shock,
extreme stress,
psychosis,
or other types of personal crisis?
Second, on the forum's
'Membership Requirements'
section, it states that
no one with "intellectual
disabilities" can join either.
Now, defining the term
'intellectual disability'
is a tiny bit problematic here,
because it's sometimes used
way too broadly to refer to
any kind of neurodivergence.
I suspected the admins intended
a much narrower definition
to refer to those who are unable to
function independently without care.
However, I can't be sure,
so let's put that to one side.
What's important is that
by placing this rule here,
the moderators are trying
to make it look like
they're taking steps
to turn away those
who might be very prone to being
manipulated by others on the forum.
To give a famous example,
in the state of Georgia in 2006,
a man named Roberto Rocha,
a 20 year old who
worked as a landscaper,
was coerced by police
into giving a false
confession for murder.
A murder it was later revealed
he couldn't possibly have committed
because he wasn't in the
country at the time.
Now, Roberto's comprehension skills
were assessed to be at the
same level as a 12 year old.
The police extracted the confession
by telling him
they already knew he was guilty
and that it was in his
best interests to confess.
He did protest at first,
but eventually gave way
due to the pressure.
A person like Roberto has
the communication skills
to pass anonymously on this forum,
no problem.
But apart from disabilities
that affect comprehension,
there are all kinds of other
vulnerable people out there.
For example,
those who suffer from
a form of psychosis,
like the condition currently
defined as schizophrenia.
A person with this condition
in the middle of a psychotic episode
might be highly susceptible to
suggestion and encouragement
during that episode.
So let's now ask the question:
Does this forum take
appropriate steps
to protect those who are
vulnerable to coercion?
No.
It's difficult to imagine a
way they could fail any worse.
I'll start with the bad,
we'll move on to the appalling,
and we'll finish with the
catastrophic.
Let's go back to the term
'sound mind'.
When treating a patient who says
they've considered ending their life,
a mental health professional
will seek to determine
whether or not the
patient is experiencing
a mental health crisis,
which is a state of mind
distinctly different to
the norm for that person.
There's a massively heightened
danger of self-harm
during a mental health crisis,
because to the person
experiencing it,
the future
or any possibility of a future
can get really obscured.
Life can seem like a
moment-to-moment existence,
and recovery can seem impossible.
As Professor Rory O’Connor,
who leads the S---cidal Behaviour
Research Laboratory
at the University
of Glasgow, puts it:
"People... take their own lives"
"when they can see
no end to their pain,"
"when they feel trapped by it"
"and that there is no way out."
"Like physical pain,"
"there is only so much mental
pain that we can withstand"
"and, when we reach our limit,"
"something has to give."
"Sadly, for too many people,"
"it is life that gives."
The thing is,
once a mental health crisis is over,
this view is nowhere near
as black and white.
To quote a representative at
the Samaritans that I spoke to:
"A mental health crisis
can feel very intense,"
"but these feelings are treatable,"
"things change,"
"the feelings pass,"
"things can get better."
To quote Professor
Rory O’Connor again:
"For most people, s---icide
risk is usually short-term"
"and linked to a specific situation,"
"often an interpersonal crisis."
"While s---cidal thoughts may
come back again for some people,"
"the vast majority will
make a full recovery."
So,
given the nature of a
mental health crisis,
where the ability to act
in one’s own self interest
can be temporarily impaired,
this question of whether a
user is acting in 'sound mind'
really is,
for this forum,
THE question.
This is something I
want to put to those
who are active on the SS forum now:
How can you determine
if someone is of sound mind,
since all they have
to do is tick a box
saying they are when they register?
How long does that tick box last?
If someone ticks it once,
is it still true six months later?
Worse,
how do you know that a person
you've been speaking to for months
who's now saying they
want to end their life
isn't someone who has an
abundance of communication skills,
but, unbeknownst to you,
has a condition that makes them
highly susceptible to suggestion?
Someone who might find it difficult
to critically assess a statement like,
"Death is really the only solution"
"when life itself is the problem,"
"it's wrong to value life in any way"?
But all this can be put to one side,
because
I haven't yet got to
the catastrophic.
You see,
the question of registration
is immaterial,
because the conversations on SS
are publicly available
for everyone to see.
And given that it has between
6 and 10 million page views a month,
this raises an even bigger question
for those active on
the forum right now:
How do you know the
conversations on SS
haven't directly led to the death of
multiple people with
intellectual disabilities,
people experiencing a
mental health crisis,
people suffering some
kind of psychosis,
or minors,
none of whom ever tried
to sign up to the site
because they didn't need to?
You can't know.
And this is the point.
The point that makes me confident
that there's no justification
on moral grounds
to continue as an
active member on SS.
And if this makes you angry,
that anger should be directed
at the moderators of SS,
because they've already
weighed this up,
and they've decided, it's fine as is,
no one should be protected
from this information.
You deserve moderators with a
baseline of rudimentary competence,
but you didn't get that.
They failed you in the most
serious way imaginable.
And to this point,
just a month ago,
a group of users
opened up a new thread
to plead on the forum
to make it private.
Some pointed out that this
would protect minors
and those in crisis
and those who might act impulsively.
The site admin’s response?
"Not enough moderators
to take care of"
"the huge waves of new
registrations that will occur"
"as soon as we make
the forum private."
"We have a lot of
non-member guests here"
"and every time we made the
forum private in the past,"
"the registration queue
would turn into"
"3-digit numbers very quickly."
cake123's response?
"People are already suffering enough"
"without having to make
an account on here."
Everyone's got their
priorities, I suppose.
So I imagine at this point
you're probably thinking,
"Who runs this site?"
"And how has it not
been shut down yet?"
Well, before I get to that,
I need to first discuss
the instruction threads,
the part of the site
that most obviously
crosses the line into
illegality in most countries.
As you can imagine,
these threads provide
instructions on
the various different ways
that you can end your own life.
They're very detailed,
they're very clinical,
and often very tough to read.
Now, here I need to be careful.
Guidelines on media
reporting on this topic
are very clear that it's dangerous
to openly discuss methods
and names of services,
because those in crisis
may take that information
and use it immediately
without hearing anything
else I have to say.
For this reason, my description
is going to have to
be vague in places,
but the substance of my
point will remain intact.
Let me map this out.
When you first arrive on the forum,
one of the first things
you'll notice is
how much the site and
many of its members
keep pushing a certain method.
The method that is,
to put it lightly,
complicated to achieve.
Now, after enough exposure to this
particular type of conversation,
you'll inevitably follow
the breadcrumb trail
to the relevant instruction thread
that promises to show you how
to accomplish this method.
However,
these instructions,
unlike many of the others,
are incomplete.
In order to get access to
the complete instructions,
you're then directed
to a different forum,
which I'm going to call 'SS2',
that requires a subscription of
nearly a hundred dollars to join.
Now, having worked in
technology for a long time,
and knowing a thing or
two about social media,
I have a pretty decent
understanding of
traffic funnels.
And, to me, this provides
a potential alternative
explanation as to
why the SS forum has
not been made private.
Because it would close off
an enormous amount of traffic
that would otherwise find its way
to the SS2 subscription service.
So, to put it mildly,
I'd love some clarification
from those who run both forums
(both of them will
definitely see this video)
about the exact nature
of their relationship.
Now, along with the
instruction threads,
SS also has a poorly
concealed system
for guiding you to
sellers who can provide
the highly advertised method
I've been speaking about.
It's one of the top
topics of conversation.
Here's a recent post
I found of a user
offering to provide
a source to buy from.
Names of specific sellers
are described using acronyms.
For example, I found
an obscure archive
where users discussed buying from
'A',
which at that time apparently
stood for 'Alejandro'.
Here's a screenshot
of the site admin
discussing Alejandro openly,
which means
the site admin is actively
participating in
helping users find sellers.
What's also clear
is that contact details
for these sellers
change constantly to stay
ahead of the authorities.
In a very recent forum post,
one person asked,
"Does anyone have the
new email address for D?"
It's then hinted obliquely
that you shouldn't really
mention the existence of
these sources in public threads.
There's actually a rule
on the site that says:
"It is against forum rules"
"to post links to sources"
"or to mention where you can
find sources in the public forum."
Well,
that's interesting.
There's a place where
you can find sources?
After creating a new
profile on the site,
I eventually found
a guy who sold me
the means for a specific method,
with zero questions asked.
I documented this entire process,
but of course I can't show it here.
The method I purchased,
(which is supposed to be
restricted in the U.K., by the way)
arrived at my door
just as I was finishing
up this video.
MARTIN: It's weird that
someone sent this to me,
and its purpose was to kill me.
So someone in the world has
actively assisted me in dying.
Um...
And this is the first time
that's ever happened to me,
you know?
it's really chilling and
it feels incredibly weird,
and I got a weird
feeling in my stomach,
uh, looking at it.
MARTIN (narrating): So, who's
responsible for setting up SS?
Well, thankfully, in this case,
we do have answers.
In late 2021, the New York Times
published an exposé
on the forum titled
'Where the Despairing Log On, and Learn Ways to Die'
by Megan Twohey and Gabriel Dance.
You might recognize Megan Twohey
as one of the two investigators
who broke the story about
the Harvey Weinstein scandal.
There's a movie about her now.
Anyway, in this exposé,
the identities of the two
people behind the site
were revealed for the first time.
The founder,
who went by the nickname 'Marquise'
was revealed to be a man named
Lamarcus Small,
who was 28 at the time
the report came out.
The co-founder, 'Serge',
was revealed to be a man named
Diego Galante,
who was 29.
The report also verified 45 deaths,
which they were able to
directly link to the SS forum,
three of whom were minors.
And with Bobby C,
I can now add a fourth to that list.
In a subsequent article,
The New York Times mentioned that
they have linked dozens
more deaths as well.
We also know,
due to an earlier BuzzFeed
article with Lamarcus and Diego
back when their identities
weren't known,
in a move I imagine they now regret,
they admitted to being
responsible for
setting up a number of other forums
for...
(wait for it...)
incels.
I'm not going to name
the forums here,
but there are quite a few of them
and they get a lot of traffic.
They offer young men a place for
misogynist, racist,
homophobic and anti-semitic venting,
with a heavy dose of pseudoscientific
nonsense thrown in too.
The main Incel site is
for raging about women.
Another forum is for
those who are unemployed.
Then there's a body image forum
where guys post shots of themselves
so other guys can comment on whether
they'd be likely to
attract a girl or not.
All handled in an unhelpful
and very toxic way,
with a funnel for the most despairing
that leads straight to SS.
According to a report titled:
'The Incelosphere'
by the Center for
Countering Digital Hate,
this network has been linked to
at least one mass shooting too.
It's also worth mentioning that
Lamarcus and Diego
both identify as incels.
With the exception of SS,
all these forums are
exclusively for men.
So if you're a woman
currently on the SS forum,
I would take a moment to
reflect on this fact:
Of all the sites these guys set up,
the only one to which
you are admitted to join
is the one that encourages
you to kill yourself.
So, after the New York Times
report came out,
both Diego and Lamarcus announced
that they were leaving the forum
and handing it over to
someone else instead.
The new person is the admin
I've been discussing this whole time.
We don't yet know a
lot about this person.
It could just be Diego or Lamarcus
using a different ProtonMail account.
Who knows?
So, to the next question:
How is this site still up?
And why do search engines
like Google still index it?
Well, at present,
neither are legally liable
for their content.
It's protection afforded by
Section 230 of Title 47 of
the United States Code,
which shields platforms
like Google or Facebook
or any other site
for being held liable
for the content published
by their users.
It's a very important law,
and, many argue,
vital to the ability of the internet
to function as we know it today.
Trying to discuss the pros
and cons of Section 230 here
would take us way too far from
the main point of this video.
Suffice it to say
that amending it is,
in practical terms,
incredibly difficult,
and doing so would not be
without negative consequences.
However,
expect to be hearing a lot
about this over the coming year,
since there are already
two cases being
considered by the
Supreme Court right now
that revolve around Section 230.
And there are more coming after that.
I've put some useful
links in the description
for those who want to learn more.
Anyway,
although it's not illegal
for Google to index SS,
that's not to say they won't bow
to pressure from their users,
us.
As long as we shout loudly enough,
I personally think Google,
Microsoft, and others
should stop indexing this
site and those like it,
because by doing so,
they're providing vulnerable
people as well as minors
with a direct link to instructions
to end their own lives.
Yes, legally they can...
but they shouldn't.
And there's increasing
need for action.
In the U.K., among
15 to 19 year olds,
the rate of taking one's own life
has sharply increased by 35%
throughout 2020 and 2021.
In the U.S.,
the overall rate has increased
also by 35% since 1999,
with 15 to 24 year olds
being at higher risk
than any other age group.
Now, given these stats
on how SS is crossing the
line in so many other ways,
other attempts to halt
its activities are emerging.
It's not illegal in most places
to encourage others
to harm themselves.
That, at present,
broadly falls within the
boundaries of free speech
in the U.S. and Europe.
But in most countries,
it is illegal to provide
instructions and help.
So, with that in mind,
in October 2022, in the U.S.,
a new bipartisan bill called
the Stop Online Assisted
S---cide Forums Act
was introduced to the
House of Representatives
by congresswoman Lori Trahan.
LORI: My name is Lori Trahan,
and I represent
Massachusetts' 3rd congressional
district in the Congress.
MARTIN: What motivated you to
introduce this bill?
LORI: We know that we're facing a
mental health crisis in our nation.
S---cide is dangerously on the rise,
and we need to be meeting
the mental health needs
of our children.
Far too many families have
lost a child or a loved one
because rather than help individuals,
they push them towards
self-harm instead.
MARTIN: The New York
Times', er, report,
did that play a big part in your-
in maki- making you-
making you aware of it?
LORI: Absolutely! I'll
never forget the morning
that I listened, er,
to The Daily, which is the
New York Times' podcast.
That's what stopped me.
I was getting ready
for work that morning
I was in Washington.
And I just-
I sat on my bed and I
listened to the whole thing.
I thought, "How could this be?"
And I just thought it
was going to be, y'know,
"Okay, folks don't know
that this is happening."
"I'm going to write to
the Department of Justice,"
"and I'm going to say,
'You need to shut this down."
And then I was reminded that there,
uh, y'know, this is a
complex legal territory
that we're in,
um, so it wasn't
just so straightforward, um...
But,
y'know, in the process
of figuring out
what our next move was,
y'know, I talked to many of
the moms and the families
who had lost a loved one,
which only emboldened
my staff and me to continue the work
a- and look at a legislative option,
which is ultimately
what we've introduced
after 11 months.
MARTIN: I'm kind of curious.
Um...
Y'know, you mentioned
that there's some,
I guess,
technicalities that are-
that are quite awkward to overcome.
W- How-
How would the bill work,
and how can it be effective?
LORI: It'll finally make it a felony
for anyone who uses
communications like online forums
to assist in another person's attempt
to die by s---cide.
Er, and most importantly,
it gives the Department of
Justice the authority it needs
to pursue cases against
s---cide assistance forums.
People's lives are at risk
every day that passes
with these sketchy websites
that are operating in
a legal gray area,
and
er, I'm committed to working
with representatives Katie Porter,
Mike Carey and Chris Stewart,
um,
who I introduced this
legislation with
er, to get it passed as-
as soon as possible.
MARTIN: Because the
site is anonymous,
and- and also because
the people who are on the site,
by the very nature of the topic,
are very very vulnerable
and we know very very young,
it just seems like the
perfect breeding ground
for...
someone who's not giving
it i- like a- a- advice.
Someone who's a malicious actor.
Someone who's there to do bad.
LORI: I think the unfortunate
reality is that these
malicious actors, uh,
they exist in real life
and online,
and what the forums
uniquely do is give
these individuals
direct access to users
who are in crisis.
Er, often our young people,
who are experiencing
some of the hardest
battles in their lives
and who desperately need help.
But...
But, y'know, rather
than offer assistance
or direct them toward resources
to get the care that they need,
these bad actors
encourage them
to harm themselves,
and then assist them.
That's the kind of behavior
we need to get rid of,
and that's the kind of
authority we give,
uh, the Department of Justice
to hold these bad actors accountable.
So this legislation isn't about,
um,
trying to shut down forums
focused on discussing s---cide.
I mean, there's real value in
people being able
to come together
and share their stories.
But what's dangerous is when
people think that
they're logging onto
a forum that will
be helpful to them,
but instead find a forum
focused on pushing them through
material support to
end their own lives.
And that's what we need to end.
MARTIN (narrating):
In 2020, in the U.K.,
a young man named Joe Nihil
took his own life aided by the forum.
In the note he left behind,
he specifically mentioned the forum
and his beliefs that it
should be closed down.
Since then, his mother Catherine
and sister-in-law Melanie,
along with Angela Stevens,
the mother of another
victim in the U.K.,
have been fighting for
stronger legislation for years.
CATHERINE: Joe was
on there for 10 days.
His first post was that he-
he was feeling really down,
and told them about
his past relationship,
and they said,
"Oh, it's never going
to get better."
Um...
"Yes, your life's"
"basically not worth living anymore".
Then they tell you that
"your parents are wrong",
they tell you that
"the doctors are wrong",
"the"
"mental health team are wrong".
So once you get to feeling that low,
that's it.
"Take your life".
"Finish it".
I suffer every day and I know
the rest of my family suffer
every day.
And it just destroys you.
ANGELA: Brett told me that
he was going on a
short holiday.
It- When he didn't return,
um,
I reported him missing.
Um...
And
the police told me that
he'd been found in
Scotland.
Police Scotland got in touch with me
and told me that he'd been on
a s---cide forum,
and they actually mentioned the name
of the- o- of the site.
And so in the March of 2020,
we went into lockdown.
Because we knew
as a family of this site,
my youngest daughter,
who was very very close to Brett,
she just couldn't come
to terms with his death.
And she actually went on to
[NAME OF FORUM CENSORED]
herself
and purchased
[NAME OF METHOD CENSORED]
MARTIN: To prove that
it could be done?
ANGELA: No.
MARTIN: Oh, okay.
ANGELA: To join her brother.
MARTIN: And- And- And you-
And you caught her?
ANGELA: She told one of her friends
that she was feeling really low,
and
he actually contacted the police
to do a welfare check.
And when-
When the police
went to my daughter's house,
she then admitted that
she'd purchased this stuff,
um...
and we were all just
an absolute wreck.
We were a wreck.
MARTIN (narrating): I should mention,
just as an aside,
that because these women
are taking a stand,
the site admin on SS likes to
goad them about the death of
their children on social media.
MARTIN: You sent me some, um...
examples of...
I felt, very very abusive
and incredibly heartless,
uh, statements that
they've made to you
just because you've
confronted them as well.
I- I mean, I don't even know
if I've seen half of it.
But, um...
CATHERINE: No, no.
MELANIE: You've definitely
not seen half of it.
MELANIE: There's a lot.
MARTIN (narrating): Anyway,
inspired by Catherine and Melanie,
their local MP, Richard Burgon,
presented a motion on
the topic in 2020.
RICHARD: My name is Richard Burgon,
I'm the Member of Parliament
for Leeds East.
Catherine and Melanie have run
a really inspiring campaign
to try and fulfill
Joe's wishes,
to try and ensure
that people aren't
exposed to that kind of
dangerous,
er, online, er, content,
So th- So that what happened to Joe
doesn't happen to,
er, other people.
MARTIN (narrating): Since then,
after a lot of discussion,
the present government in
the U.K. has introduced
the Online Safety bill,
a broad new legislation
which is currently working its
way through Parliament right now.
This is quite a different legislation
to that being introduced in the U.S..
It's had a rough ride so far
due to, again,
concerns about
safeguarding free speech,
which led to some big changes
in the proposal in 2022.
The most contentious part,
which has since been
taken out of the bill,
requires sites to remove content
the government deemed to be harmful,
even though that content
isn't illegal.
RICHARD: In fact, a lot of us
at the bill, in relation to
s---cide-related online content,
were going in the right direction,
but this new development of the
'government removing the
legal-but-harmful' clause
is really a worrying step backwards.
I have to save the bill.
MARTIN (narrating):
However, in its place,
the government included
a new amendment
that would make it illegal to
encourage someone else to self-harm.
And if that gets passed into law,
that's a very big step.
MARTIN: I would imagine t- that you-
You would welcome the,
uh, criminalization of
encouragement of, uh, self-harm,
which I think was introduced
recently, right?
RICHARD: Yes. So what David Davis,
the,
uh, Conservative MP, brought
a very helpful Amendment
to the bill,
uh, which I signed up to,
which I supported,
uh, which,
uh, criminalized
the encouragement of
civilian self-harm.
Uh, that's amazing. Very important.
MARTIN (narrating): And just as
I was finalizing this video,
on the 16th of January,
a large backbench revolt
in the Tory party
succeeded in forcing the government
to add a new provision that
would make social media bosses
face prison time
if they failed to protect under 18’s
from damaging online content.
The next step involves
what will probably be
a lengthy passage
through the House of Lords.
So this whole story
is nowhere near over.
There's a lot left to be uncovered,
a lot left to be resolved,
and we'll just have to see what
happens over the coming months.
Now, my focus is on what
happened to Bobby C,
and to try and use this example
to raise awareness about
how dangerous and manipulative
those who run the SS forum are.
My appeal is simple:
If you're not on it,
please never seek it out,
it'll only do you harm.
And if you are on it,
please, please leave.
The moderators have failed
everyone who joined
the site in good faith.
They made the whole thing
publicly available,
including instructions on
how to end your life.
They chastised the voices of reason
while encouraging their
most toxic members.
The incels who started it
have ostensibly handed
it over to people
who are equally as toxic,
stupid,
uncaring,
and unqualified as they were.
It encourages isolation
from your family,
and advises against seeking help.
It has people who are empowered
to tell you that life is meaningless.
It is a perfect breeding ground for
psychos and abusers.
It actively discourages recovery.
It has the blood of 4 minors—
4 that we know about—
on its hands.
Now, I should mention that
there are users on the
forum who are not toxic,
who are just looking for
a place where they can
speak freely and feel listened to.
And the reason they're on
the site is partly due to
an unhelpful stigma
surrounding this topic.
People are very often ashamed to
discuss feelings of wanting to
end their own lives openly,
which is a poor reflection
on society as a whole.
Let's name one stigma
mentioned by Professor
Rory O’Connor:
it's way too commonly
to write it as a
"selfish act",
which in turn makes it far less
likely that people will bring it up
for fear of being
chastised or shunned.
Instead, he suggests,
the act is way more
likely to be carried out
in a moment of desperation
by those in crisis,
who could no longer withstand
severe mental pain,
and who are unable to see
beyond that pain at that moment.
For those feeling hopeless,
you should speak to a few people
before making any other plans.
Those who say otherwise are probably
not acting in your real interest.
Now, I've put a couple of links
in the description below,
but there may very easily be
local options you can access with
a quick search engine
check, for example.
And also, remember
that if for some reason
you don't connect
with one mental health specialist,
this doesn't mean that
seeking help is pointless.
If one person doesn't
succeed in helping you,
someone else most likely can.
And please don't go alone.
Recovery is possible.
Things can get better,
and there are people in the world
who do want the best for you.
And if you're feeling
like you're in crisis,
there are experts who
can at least provide you
with a better sense of your options.
Nothing bad will come
from speaking to them.
Again, see the links
in the description.
And to everyone else watching,
I have a final thought.
There really should be
no reason a person has to
seek out an anonymous forum
to find comfort.
There are things we can all
do directly to combat this,
by applying small
protocols of our own.
Do we know people we
suspect are in pain?
Can we just give them a
call and listen to them?
Are there ways we can make the world
a little nicer for them
and for others?
And can we be a little
less aggressive
when others do or say
things we find irritating?
Can we just cut people's
slack sometimes?
Because you never know,
they could be having a
tough time right now
due to problems that we can't see.
This is the harder road
to take for sure,
but it's also highly rewarding too.
A report from the International
Association for S---cide Prevention
put it best:
"Every step closer can
connect someone to life"
"and the help they want."
"Sometimes those steps are big,"
"but sometimes"
"all it takes is a smile."
That's everything I have to say.
Thanks very much.